## Atomicity

Either the whole transaction successfully executed  
Either it fully fails.

If the writes are grouped together into an atomic transaction, and the transaction cannot be completed (committed) due to a fault, then the transaction is aborted and the database must discard or undo any writes it has made so far in that transaction

## Consistency  (aka Correctness)

Transaction can only bring the database from one   
valid state to another. Any data written to the  database must be valid according to all defined rules, including constraints, cascades, triggers,   
and any combination thereof.
> However, this idea of consistency depends on the application’s notion of invariants, and it’s the application’s responsibility to define its transactions correctly so that they preserve consistency. This is not something that the database can guarantee: if you write bad data that violates your invariants, the database can’t stop you. Some specific kinds of invariants can be checked by the database, for example using foreign key constraints or uniqueness constraints. However, in general, the application defines what data is valid or invalid—the database only stores it.

## Isolation

Isolation ensures that concurrent execution of transactions leaves the database in the same state that would have been obtained if the transactions were  executed sequentially. Isolation is the main goal of concurrency control; depending on the method used, the effects of an incomplete transaction might not even be visible to other transactions.

## Durability

Guarantees that once a transaction has been committed, it will remain committed even in the case of a system failure (e.g., power outage or crash).
> Perfect durability does not exist: if all your hard disks and all your backups are destroyed at the same time, there’s obviously nothing your database can do to save you.

--- 

 In practice, one database’s implementation of ACID does not equal another’s implementation.
 
 Today, when a system claims to be “ACID compliant,” it’s unclear what guarantees you can actually expect. ACID has unfortunately become mostly a marketing term.
 
 Systems that do not meet the ACID criteria are sometimes called *BASE*, which stands for *Basically Available, Soft state, and Eventual consistency*