A key feature of a transaction is that it can be aborted and safely retried if an error occurred. ACID databases are based on this philosophy: if the database is in danger of violating its guarantee of atomicity, isolation, or durability, it would rather abandon the transaction entirely than allow it to remain half-finished.

Not all systems follow that philosophy, though. In particular, datastores with leader‐ less replication work much more on a “best effort” basis, which could be summarized as “the database will do as much as it can, and if it runs into an error, it won’t undo something it has already done”

Retrying transaction cons:
-   If the transaction actually succeeded, but the network failed while the server tried to acknowledge the successful commit to the client, then retrying the transaction causes it to be performed twice
-   If the error is due to overload, retrying the transaction will make the problem worse, not better. To avoid such feedback cycles, you can limit the number of retries, use exponential backoff, and handle overload-related errors differently from other errors
-   It is only worth retrying after transient errors (for example due to deadlock, iso‐ lation violation, temporary network interruptions, and failover); after a perma‐ nent error (e.g., constraint violation) a retry would be pointless.
-   If the transaction also has side effects outside of the database, those side effects may happen even if the transaction is aborted. For example, if you’re sending an email, you wouldn’t want to send the email again every time you retry the transaction. If you want to make sure that several differen t systems either commit or abort together, two-phase commit can help
-   If the client process fails while retrying, any data it was trying to write to the database is lost.



