## Statement-based replication

In the simplest case, the leader logs every write request (statement) that it executes and sends that statement log to its followers.
Disadvantages:
-   Any statement that calls a nondeterministic function, such as NOW(), is likely to generate a different value on each replica
-   If statements use an autoincrementing column, or if they depend on the existing data in the database, they must be executed in exactly the same order on each replica, or else they may have a different effect. This can be limiting when there are multiple concurrently executing transactions.
-   Statements that have side effects (e.g., triggers, stored procedures, user-defined functions) may result in different side effects occurring on each replica, unless the side effects are absolutely deterministic.


##  Write-ahead log (WAL) shipping

Usually, with any data representation on a disk every wite is appended to a log:
-   In the case of a log-structured storage engine, this log is the main place for storage. Log segments are compacted and garbage-collected in the background.
    
-   In the case of a B-tree, which overwrites individual disk blocks, every modification is first written to a write-ahead log so that the index can be restored to a consistent state after a crash.
 
 In either case, the log is an append-only sequence of bytes containing all writes to the database. We can use the exact same log to build a replica on another node: besides writing the log to disk, the leader also sends it across the network to its followers. When the follower processes this log, it builds a copy of the exact same data structures as found on the leader.
 
 This method of replication is used in PostgreSQL and Oracle, among others. The main disadvantage is that the log describes the data on a very low level: a WAL contains details of which bytes were changed in which disk blocks. This makes replication closely coupled to the storage engine. If the database changes its storage format from one version to another, it is typically not possible to run different versions of the database software on the leader and the followers.
 
 ## Logical (row-based) log replication
 
An alternative is to use different log formats for replication and for the storage engine, which allows the replication log to be decoupled from the storage engine internals. This kind of replication log is called a logical log, to distinguish it from the storage engine’s (physical) data representation.
 
A logical log for a relational database is usually a sequence of records describing writes to database tables at the granularity of a row:

-   For an inserted row, the log contains the new values of all columns.

-   For a deleted row, the log contains enough information to uniquely identify the row that was deleted. Typically this would be the primary key, but if there is no primary key on the table, the old values of all columns need to be logged.
    
-   For an updated row, the log contains enough information to uniquely identify the updated row, and the new values of all columns (or at least the new values of all columns that changed).

A transaction that modifies several rows generates several such log records, followed by a record indicating that the transaction was committed.

## Trigger based replication

 For example, if you want to only replicate a subset of the data, or want to replicate from one kind of database to another, or if you need conflict resolution logic, then you may need to move replication up to the application layer.

Some tools, such as Oracle GoldenGate, can make data changes available to an application by reading the database log. An alternative is to use features that are available in many relational databases: *triggers* and *stored procedures*.

A trigger lets you register custom application code that is automatically executed when a data change occurs in a database system. The trigger has the opportunity to log this change into a separate table, from which it can be read by an external process. Databus for Oracle and Bucardo for Postgres work like this, for example.

Trigger-based replication typically has greater overheads than other replication methods, and is more prone to bugs and limitations than the database’s built-in replication. However, it can nevertheless be useful due to its flexibility.

