Dynamo-style databases allow several clients to concurrently write to the same key, which means that conflicts will occur even if strict quorums are used. The situation is similar to multi-leader replication.

The problem is that events may arrive in a different order at different nodes, due to variable network delays and partial failures.

One approach for ahieving is *Last Write Wins*. But it might cause some of the changes to be lost.

Two operations are concurrent, if *happens-before* relation is not applicable to them. I.e. they do not know about each other. Whenever you have two operations A and B, there are three possibilities: either A happened before B, or B happened before A, or A and B are concurrent.

**Versioning algorithm:**
-   The server maintains a version number for every key, increments the version number every time that key is written, and stores the new version number along with the value written.
-   When a client reads a key, the server returns all values that have not been over‐ written, as well as the latest version number. A client must read a key before writing.
-   When a client writes a key, it must include the version number from the prior read, and it must merge together all values that it received in the prior read. (The response from a write request can be like a read, returning all current values, which allows us to chain several writes like in the shopping cart example.)
-   When the server receives a write with a particular version number, it can over‐ write all values with that version number or below (since it knows that they have been merged into the new value), but it must keep all values with a higher ver‐ sion number (because those values are concurrent with the incoming write).
-   Merging happens by application, or by newer timestamp

**Version vector**

Need to use a version number per replica as well as per key. Each replica increments its own version number when processing a write, and also keeps track of the version numbers it has seen from each of the other replicas. The collection of version numbers from all the replicas is called a version vector.